Emancipation of Women

The ideological source of CCP’s effort to improve women’s status was Engels’ The Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State. Engels argued that sexual inequality came from private property ownership, male monopolization of control over property, and female dependence upon male, and that the situation could only be rectified if private property ownership were to be eliminated, and women participated in the workforce (Whyte & Parish, 196). The Communist government was very successful in incorporating women into the workforce, and significantly improved the social status of women, however, they were unable to completely eliminate the gap between male and female economic and political status.

By the late Qing period, China had developed into a highly stratified and rigid society. On a national level, the emperor was at the top, government officials and wealthy merchants fell in the middle, and the peasants, which constitute the majority of the population, were at the bottom. On a local level, the power structure was characterized by a rank of seniority, and a tradition of male superiority. Children must obey their parents and older siblings unquestionably; wives and daughters must obey their husbands and fathers. Before the age of western imperialism, these Confucious ideals were seen as the foundations of society.

In the 1940s, Britain and other western powers forced China to open its market and cede control over various territories. Humiliated by the amount of power foreigners had over China, people sought to launch social and political reforms so that China would regain its previous status. During this period, many Chinese traveled abroad to learn from the more developed societies, as a result, they brought back ideas of Enlightenment — of freedom and equality (Kenley, 20).

After the overthrow of the Qing dynasty, China fell into a period of civil wars known as the Warlord Era. Regional military leaders fought each other to expand their territories and control, with little regard to the welfare of the people; Most of them had little desire to establish a united republic of China, and only wished to be rulers of their local regions. Seeing that weapons were useless, intellectuals used their pens to attack the various problems of the feudal mindset and the backward ways of the traditional society, including the practice of foot binding (Kenley, 42).

In traditional China, women were regarded as subordinates of their fathers, husbands, and sons. A woman did not have the right to inherit property from her natal family, or even her husband’s family unless she had an adult son. An ideal woman was one who was completely submissive and loyal to her husband. Loyalty did not only mean fealty to one’s husband when he is alive, but also implied that a woman should die with her husband (Kenley, 25).

The practice of arranged marriage meant that there was often no choice in marriage. And while the wife had to remain loyal or else face severe punishment, the husband could marry multiple wives. Women were not allowed to work outside the home, so they were economically dependent upon men. Divorce could only be initiated by the husband, and would ruin the wife’s reputation. Even if a woman was able to leave her husband’s family, she could not take her children with her, nor could she return to her natal family. Rivalry was common between the wives of a man, and between a wife and a mother-in-law. For while a mother’s control over her son was lenient, a mother-in-law’s control over her son’s wife was absolute, and wives were often mistreated and oppressed by their mother-in-laws (Potter & Potter, 21).

Even if married women were bound by the patriarchal order, they still had some value for their husbands’ families as the bearer and carer of children. In contrast, unmarried women often worthed very little to their natal family. When a woman marries, she would become part of her husband’s household; so a daughter could not be expected to pay back the family that raised her, or take care of her parents when they grew old. For these reasons, raising a daughter was considered an unprofitable business, and thus daughters often received much less attention and care, and usually no education. And when a family was struggling, it was often the case that daughters would be sold, and female infants would be left to die (Potter & Potter, 20).

While social constraints could be abolished, permanent physical damages could not be reversed. During the Qing dynasty, a very cruel and absurd practice was common among Chinese women: foot binding. This practice was meant to satisfy men’s preference for women with smaller feet. It was done by breaking the feet of a girl at the age of six, and wrapping the broken feet in cloth so that the woman’s feet would be permanently small and deformed. For men, it had the additional benefit of making sure that they would always have an upper hand over their wife if it came to a physical fight (Kenley, 26).

By the early 1900s, however, Chinese leading intellectuals began to call these practices into question. In 1912, the new Republic of China officially banned foot binding. However, after Sun Yat-sen died in 1925, Chiang Kai-shek turned on his communist allies, and due to his lack of control over the warlords and the subsequent Japanese invasion, China was never truly united under the Nationalist government (Kenley, 46).

The communists, on the other hand, regarded the oppression of women as a direct result of the feudal order, and a central problem of society. They believed that the situation must be rectified, and went through great lengths to achieve this.

As soon as New China was established, the Communist party began to launch a nationwide illiteracy eradication campaign, which drastically increased the number of educated women in the years between 1950 and 1958. The communist party established after-work schools in both rural and urban areas, giving workers, especially young workers who started working from an early age, an opportunity to receive formal education and have access to higher education and more advanced professions (Historical Liberation of Women).

In 1949, the communist party in Beijing began a campaign to ban prostitution. The government closed all brothels in the city, and gathered the former prostitutes so that they could receive treatment, be steered away from the trade that degraded women, and become able to support themselves through work. This campaign spread to large and small cities throughout the country, and resulted in the complete eradication of one of the most prominent plights of women (Historical Liberation of Women).

The Marriage Law of 1950 banned polygamy and child marriage, and granted women the right to divorce. The Communist Party also granted women the right to choose their own marriage partners, the right to join the workforce, the right to inherit property, the right to receive education, and the right to participate in politics. Following the promulgation of the New Marriage Law, a campaign was launched to publicize and enforce the Marriage Law. While local resistance was prominent, this campaign enabled many women to end their forced marriages, and in the long run, subverted the feudal system that enabled the rule of men over women  (Wemheuer, 73).

In 1958, the CCP launched a campaign to include all women in the workforce, however, while this campaign was initially successful, the hastily established urban communes, consisted almost entirely of women, did not turn out to be very profitable; and the public dining halls in agricultural communes meant to free women from domestic labor were abolished after the famine of 1959-1961 (Wemheuer, 131).

Overall, while national campaigns in the 1950s were successful in raising women’s social status, the subsequent campaigns to include all women in the industrial workforce were less successful, as they were impaired by the catastrophe of the Great Leap Forward.

In conclusion, while women in China had less opportunity in higher education, less access to desirable jobs, less likelihood to obtain political power compared to men, and often shouldered the double burden of work and family; in general, women were empowered by access to primary and secondary education, new marriage laws that encouraged marriage by choice, increasingly bilineal family structure that no longer favored sons over daughters, and equal participation in the labor force as men (Whyte & Parish, 225).
