China’s Social Economic Reforms in the 1950’s

In 1949, the Communist Army won against the the Nationalist Army and established the People’s Republic of China, In the following decade, China went through a series of rural and urban economic reforms that were meant to uproot the feudal and capitalist social orders, provide basic sustenance for the people, and create a new social order that promised equality, justice, and prosperity.

The first step was land reform. Land reform had been advocated as a method to equalize the resource among peasants and landlords since the Qing dynasty was overthrown and Sun Yat-sen founded the Republic of China (C. K. Yang, 133). However, Sun Yat-sen’s successor Chaing Kai-shek’s efforts of modernizing China mainly focused on the renovation of major urban cities, which left out 80 percent of the population that lived in rural areas (Kenley, 44).

The goal of land reform was to reverse the social order in rural society. Before the communist takeover, landlords and rich peasants, who constituted only 10 percent of the rural population, owned 80 percent of the land. As a result, the poor peasants were constantly under the threat of starvation. The communists regarded this as a case of feudalistic exploitation and a major obstacle against the democratization of the nation (C. K. Yang, 132).

The basic idea of land reform was to confiscate the land of the landlord class and redistribute the land to peasants who had insufficient land. Communist party cadres from the Land Reform Committee were sent to villages to initiate and oversee the land reform. They accomplished this by advocating the idea of “class struggle” among peasants, befriending and seeking help from the local communities, and supporting the establishment of peasants’ association and local militia (C. K. Yang, 134). This preparation stage of land reform allowed the local peasant communities to understand the purpose of land reform, build trust for the government, and unite under a common cause.

The initial stage of land reform involved the reduction and refund of rent, elimination of local gangs, and classification of local population. The second stage of land reform was the confiscation of land from landowners and redistribution of land to poor peasants.

Theoretically, the confiscated land should be distributed so that each recipient should receive a piece of land of similar quality. In reality, the better-quality lands were often taken by people who had more influence or connection. Once the redistribution of land had been settled, each household would receive a certificate that recorded the members of the household and their right to use the land (C. K. Yang, 150).

The land reform movement was successful in the sense that it equalized the wealth between the rich and poor in the rural societies, and improved the economic conditions of the poorest peasants. However, it instigated many controversies along the way, as it involved the violation of property rights, uncontrolled violence, and corruption.

The second stage of the socialist transformation of industry and agriculture was collectivization of agriculture. The primary motivation for the collectivization of agriculture was the belief that large-scale collaboration among the agricultural workers would increase grain production, which would in turn feed the growth of the industrial sector. A secondary motivation was that collectivization would prevent the reemergence of class division by eliminating land ownership and private property.

Prior to China’s communist takeover, the Soviet Union already experimented with collectivization between 1928 and 1931. However, the push for collectivization in the Soviet Union lacked popular support and resulted in strong resistance and severe conflicts between the state and the peasant population. In contrast to the Soviet Union, the Chinese government took on a gradualist approach when advancing collectivization (Wemheuer, 101).

The Communist party applied a three-stage collectivization program: First, the establishment of mutual-aid teams, which involved organizing several families into one work unit. Next, the creation of agricultural cooperatives, or the merging of a group of mutual-aid teams into a single collective unit, which shared land and tools. Finally, the establishment of advanced cooperatives, which were larger in scale and implied permanent membership (C. K. Yang, 204).

Collectivization resulted in a general increase in grain output by facilitating the pooling of tools and labor, reclamation of waste land, water control and irrigation projects, expansion of double-crop areas, and adoption of standardized measures of cultivation, despite the lack of tools and working capital.

However, several factors restricted farmers’ income despite the overall increase in agricultural production. In 1953, the system of “unified purchase and sale” was established, this system allowed the government to collect grain from production units at a set price (Wemheuer, 104). This system resulted in over-extraction of grain, leaving the peasants in many areas with barely enough income to sustain themselves. The focus of the cooperatives on main crop production prevented many farmers from engaging in subsidiary production, which were often much more profitable than the main crops (C. K. Yang, 233). The combination effects of the over-extraction of grain, restriction of subsidiary farming, together with taxes and high cost of production, curtailed the income of individual farmers (C. K. Yang, 237).

In the urban sector, the socialist transformation mainly involved implementation of the household registration system, the food rationing system, and the job allocation system.

In an effort to reverse the trend of overcrowding coastal cities, which caused high rates of unemployment, starvation, crime, and prostitution, the communist government sought to limit urban population and provide decent living conditions for all urban residents (Whyte & Parish, 14). In the early 1950’s, partially due to the Korean War, many factories were relocated to the interior of China, which led to development of interior cities (Whyte & Parish, 17). In 1958, new laws established a hierarchical administrative system that ranked cities and countryside. One could transfer from cities to countryside relatively easily, but required job assignment or school enrollment in order to transfer from rural to urban areas (Whyte & Parish, 18). This administration system required household registration for the entire population, which was facilitated by the combined administrative efforts of local police stations, work units, and schools.

The local police stations were part of the residential administrative system, responsible for maintaining the record of household registration information of each family in the neighborhood, which included the name, sex, age, marital status, and occupation of each member of the household (Whyte & Parish, 23).

Food rationing was a fundamental aspect of the Chinese urban socialist economy. Introduced in 1953, food rationing, together with the unified purchase and sale system, was designed to satisfy the basic food requirement of the urban population and restrict food consumption (Wemheuer, 104).

Work units was another fundamental aspect of the Chinese socialist economy. State-owned work units, which constituted 70 to 80 percent of the non-agricultural workforce, often paid according to a fixed wage scale, provided a range of benefits, including housing, child education, healthcare, and provided permanent employment (Whyte & Parish, 33). People were assigned to their work units by the state job allocation system; Individual choices were often unaccounted for (Whyte & Parish, 39). In general, state-owned work units often received government subsidies while collective work units were left to survive on their own. Since state-owned units were often large and vital enterprises such as banks, industrial plants, schools, and hospitals; and collective units were often neighborhood workshops, the state-owned units generally fared better than collective units (Whyte & Parish, 29).

Overall, China’s planned socialism prioritized cities over countrysides (heavy industry over agriculture), state-owned enterprise over collective enterprise (formal over informal sector), and collective goals over individual choices. As a result, the industrial sector grew significantly, and income disparity decreased to a level that was much lower than other developing societies.

The problem of this system, however, was that it created a new form of rural-urban divide; and due to the guaranteed job security and frozen wage, people had little incentive to work hard, resulting in low productivity. This low productivity and the resulting lack of profit made it difficult to expand the enterprises and create more jobs, thus leading to unemployment (Whyte & Parish, 55).
